---
layout: post
title: Idea formation - OLBio
date: 2019-06-10 22:45
tags: ideas olbio
---

Based on Open Leaders & conveniently timed to coincide with the [OLX announcement](https://medium.com/read-write-participate/introducing-open-leaders-x-ol%CB%A3-a12e049f5cc0).

## Basic structure:

1. Course spanning N weeks, aiming at getting open source projects at a higher, more reproducible standard. What is N? Base on content for curriculum.
  - "cohort" interactive calls w/ all? USA + Europe cohort? No, ideally only one for starters - 5pm UK time so USA and euro can attend?
  - One-on-one mentors for participants. Alternate cohort calls with mentors calls, like OL3/4/5/6/7
2. Longitudinal study. Observe projects before, after, 6 and 12 months after?
  - observations: need to look up current accepted measurement techniques for A) science software projects and B) open source projects.
  - Surveys: self-reporting project health & medium-term predictions / roadmap
  - GitHub / GitLab API to compare self-reported metrics and potentially to continue measuring even if dropoff (is this ethical? The info is public)


## Resources
### People
- speakers at cohort calls
- mentors
- cohort call hosts
- curriculum designers / reviewers

### Collaborators / sponsors
- Might any journals be interested in this? Could champion as part of the open source toolkit on PLOS?
- Encourage participants to publish in JOSS
- Can Mozilla offer any support?
- Apply to OBF as a member organisation / consider

### Video conferences / cohort calls
- Where does the Zoom come from (needs to be Zoom specifically; this allows good breakout rooms)

## Topics to cover (to be added to, preliminary)
- Basics of an open source project - readme, roadmap
- Basics of git? Assess if needed
- Diversity and inclusion
- what makes scientific software good and reproducible?
  - definitely guest speakers for this
- possibly also writing and reviewing scientific abstracts. Aim for BOSC or GCC-ready submissions? Other conferences?
